[docs] Indirectly device accessible update (#2273)
uxlfoundation/oneDPL: documentation/library_guide/parallel_api/pass_data_algorithms.rst

The following subsections describe proper ways to pass data to an algorithm invoked with a device execution policy.

.. _indirectly-device-accessible:

Indirectly Device Accessible
----------------------------
Iterators and iterator-like types may or may not refer to content accessible within a
`SYCL <https://registry.khronos.org/SYCL/specs/sycl-2020/html/sycl-2020.html>`_ kernel on a device. The term
*indirectly device accessible* refers to a type that represents content accessible on a device. An indirectly device

> accessible iterator is a type that can also be dereferenced within a SYCL kernel.

Reviewer: Do I get it right that in order to be considered indirectly device copyable the type must provide `true` when with `is_onedpl_indirectly_device_accessible_v`?

If so, Let's unite that section with "Indirect Device Accessibility Type Trait".

Author: I think the term *indirectly device accessible* is more a general thing representing the semantic meaning described here. The trait allows oneDPL to properly treat types which are *indirectly device accessible*.  That being said, I dont have an objection to combining the sections.

Author: combined

When passed to |onedpl_short| algorithms with a device execution policy, indirectly device accessible types minimize

> data movement and behave equivalently to using the type directly within a SYCL kernel.

Author: I think this can now be resolved with your accepted changes.

to explicitly control which access mode should be applied to a particular buffer when submitting
a SYCL kernel to a device:

The return types of the ``begin`` and ``end`` functions are

> `indirectly device accessible <indirectly-device-accessible>`_.

Reviewer 2: Does it also mean, that
`oneapi::dpl::is_indirectly_device_accessible<decltype(oneapi::dpl::begin(buf)))>`
is `std::true_type`?

Reviewer 2: And the second question.
Does it also mean, that
1) `is_onedpl_indirectly_device_accessible_v` is true
`oneapi::dpl::begin(buf)` type ?

2) `oneapi::dpl::__ranges::__is_passed_directly_device_ready_v` is true for `oneapi::dpl::begin(buf)` type? if "yes", I am afraid that it is not quite correct with the implementation perspective.

Author: Yes, or they have the characteristics of `std::true_type`.  These types are not device copyable though, so they will not be "passed directly" to kernels, and will not operate differently than they ever have.

Author: `oneapi::dpl::begin(buf)` is not device copyable, this means `oneapi::dpl::__ranges::__is_passed_directly_device_ready_v` is `false`.  It contains a `sycl::buffer`.  The idea here was to have this trait / customization point provide the meaning: "representing data inherently accessible on the device", which is true of `oneapi::dpl::begin(buf)`.  

There was a discussion about this in the specification PR, this was at the suggestion of @akukanov .

``sycl::usm_allocator`` is used. For ``std::vector`` with a USM allocator we recommend to use ``std::vector::data()`` in
combination with ``std::vector::size()`` as shown in the example above, rather than iterators to
``std::vector``. That is because for some implementations of the C++ Standard Library it might not
be possible for |onedpl_short| to detect that iterators are pointing to USM-allocated data. In that
case the data will be treated as if it were in host memory, with an extra copy made to a SYCL buffer.
Retrieving USM pointers from ``std::vector`` as shown guarantees no unintended copying.

.. _use-iterators:

Use |onedpl_short| Iterators
----------------------------

|onedpl_short| provides a set of `iterators <iterators-details>`_ that can be used to pass data to algorithms, in
combination with the data storage types described above. To pass data to an algorithm with a device execution policy,
use iterators that are both `SYCL device-copyable`_ and `indirectly device accessible <indirectly-device-accessible>`_.
These properties of the |onedpl_short| iterators are described in `this table <iterator-properties-table>`_.

> Use Custom Iterators

Reviewer: I've just found that the [corresponding RFC](https://github.com/uxlfoundation/oneDPL/tree/main/rfcs/proposed/iterators_pass_directly_customization) is at "proposal" stage, not even "experimental".

Should we rush documenting it for 2022.9 the way it is described right now?

Perhaps, it may become an experimental feature, and we will need to change the interface and move it into "Technical Preview" section.
I think that this feature is for very advanced users and it may be sufficient for such users to reference this RFC. In the meantime, we can polish the documentation.

Reviewer 3: The feature is implemented as a fully supported feature of oneDPL -- https://github.com/uxlfoundation/oneDPL/pull/2126
It is also included in the oneDPL specification as a full feature -- https://github.com/uxlfoundation/oneAPI-spec/pull/625

A PR to move the RFC into the supported folder is needed to get it in the correct state.  Given this I do think we need to include documentation for the feature in 2022.9.

Author: https://github.com/uxlfoundation/oneDPL/pull/2278

forward declaration only, without defining a body.

The return type of ``is_onedpl_indirectly_device_accessible`` is examined at compile time to determine if ``T`` is
indirectly device accessible. The function overload to use must be selected with argument-dependent lookup.

.. note::
  Therefore, according to the rules in the C++ Standard, a derived type for which there is no function overload
  will match its most specific base type for which an overload exists.

Once ``is_onedpl_indirectly_device_accessible(T)`` is defined, the `public trait <indirectly-device-accessible-trait>`_
``template<typename T> oneapi::dpl::is_indirectly_device_accessible[_v]`` will return the appropriate value. This public
trait can also be used to define the return type of ``is_onedpl_indirectly_device_accessible(T)`` by applying it to any
source iterator component types.

The following example shows how to define a customization for the ``is_indirectly_device_accessible`` trait for a simple
user defined iterator. It also shows a more complex example where the customization is defined as a hidden friend of
the iterator class.

> .. code:: cpp

Author: thanks, fixed.

``sycl::usm_allocator`` is used. For ``std::vector`` with a USM allocator we recommend to use ``std::vector::data()`` in
combination with ``std::vector::size()`` as shown in the example above, rather than iterators to
``std::vector``. That is because for some implementations of the C++ Standard Library it might not
be possible for |onedpl_short| to detect that iterators are pointing to USM-allocated data. In that
case the data will be treated as if it were in host memory, with an extra copy made to a SYCL buffer.
Retrieving USM pointers from ``std::vector`` as shown guarantees no unintended copying.

.. _use-iterators:

Use |onedpl_short| Iterators
----------------------------

|onedpl_short| provides a set of `iterators <iterators-details>`_ that can be used to pass data to algorithms, in
combination with the data storage types described above. To pass data to an algorithm with a device execution policy,
use iterators that are both `SYCL device-copyable`_ and `indirectly device accessible <indirectly-device-accessible>`_.
These properties of the |onedpl_short| iterators are described in `this table <iterator-properties-table>`_.

> Use Custom Iterators

Reviewer: We can move oneDPL iterators and Custom iterators together. They also stand out with their description. That's probably a matter of taste. I slightly prefer these section being at the bottom, but I do not insist.

> Use Custom Iterators

Author: moved.

--------------------
If the provided iterators are not sufficient for your needs, you can create your own iterators that can be used as input
to |onedpl_short| algorithms. To pass data to an algorithm with a device execution policy, the custom iterator must

> be `SYCL device-copyable`_ and indirectly device accessible. 

Reviewer: I think I am a perfect "laboratory mouse" to try this feature basing solely on this document, as I have not read the corresponding RFC, nor participated during the development of the feature. 

This is my example:
```c++
#include <iterator>
#include <cstddef>
#include <iostream>

#include <oneapi/dpl/execution>
#include <oneapi/dpl/iterator>
#include <oneapi/dpl/numeric>

template <typename T>
class iter
{
public:
    using iterator_category = std::random_access_iterator_tag;
    using value_type        = T;
    using difference_type   = std::ptrdiff_t;
    using pointer           = T*;
    using reference         = T&;

    iter() noexcept : ptr_(nullptr) {}
    explicit iter(T* ptr) noexcept : ptr_(ptr) {}

    reference operator*() const noexcept { return *ptr_; }
    pointer operator->() const noexcept { return ptr_; }

    iter& operator++() noexcept { ++ptr_; return *this; }
    iter operator++(int) noexcept { auto tmp = *this; ++(*this); return tmp; }

    iter& operator--() noexcept { --ptr_; return *this; }
    iter operator--(int) noexcept { auto tmp = *this; --(*this); return tmp; }

    iter& operator+=(difference_type n) noexcept { ptr_ += n; return *this; }
    iter& operator-=(difference_type n) noexcept { ptr_ -= n; return *this; }

    iter operator+(difference_type n) const noexcept { return iter(ptr_ + n); }
    iter operator-(difference_type n) const noexcept { return iter(ptr_ - n); }

    difference_type operator-(const iter& other) const noexcept { return ptr_ - other.ptr_; }

    reference operator[](difference_type n) const noexcept { return ptr_[n]; }

    bool operator==(const iter& other) const noexcept { return ptr_ == other.ptr_; }
    bool operator!=(const iter& other) const noexcept { return ptr_ != other.ptr_; }
    bool operator<(const iter& other) const noexcept { return ptr_ < other.ptr_; }
    bool operator<=(const iter& other) const noexcept { return ptr_ <= other.ptr_; }
    bool operator>(const iter& other) const noexcept { return ptr_ > other.ptr_; }
    bool operator>=(const iter& other) const noexcept { return ptr_ >= other.ptr_; }

private:
    T* ptr_;
};

int main()
{
    sycl::queue q{};

    int* d_head = sycl::malloc_shared<int>(5, q);
    for (int i = 0; i < 5; ++i) { d_head[i] = i;}

    iter<int> begin(d_head);
    iter<int> end(d_head + 5);
    int res = oneapi::dpl::reduce(oneapi::dpl::execution::make_device_policy(q), begin, end);

    sycl::free(d_head, q);
    std::cout << "is_indirectly_device_accessible_v: " << (oneapi::dpl::is_indirectly_device_accessible_v<iter<int>>) << std::endl;
    std::cout << "Result: " << res << std::endl;
    return 0;
}
```

It returns that:
```bash
is_indirectly_device_accessible_v: 0
Result: 10
```
The requirement `is_indirectly_device_accessible_v` is not fulfilled, but it works. Is it UB, or an issue with the implementation or I simply miss something?

Author: My assumption is that this works, but works through the path that normally handles host side iterators like `std::vector::iterator` with a host allocator.  Since you use shared memory, it is accessible on the host, and is copied into a buffer by value, then returned after the return back to the USM shared memory.  This works but is highly inefficient.

This could either be confirmed via a debugger, checking which path it takes through `__get_sycl_range`, with a breakpoint in the call operator of that struct in `include/oneapi/dpl/pstl/hetero/dpcpp/utils_ranges_sycl.h:688`, or you can likely break this by making the `malloc_shared` into a `malloc_device`.  For the latter, this would *not* work as device memory cannot be deferenced on the host (and copied into a buffer).

I agree, I need to rephrase this with more specific and accurate language describing the details of this.

                        oneapi::dpl::counting_iterator<int>(0),
                        oneapi::dpl::counting_iterator<int>(n),
                        d_head);

      // Reduce every second element, 5 elements in total: 0, 2, 4, 6, 8
      strided_iterator<int*> stride2(d_head, 2);
      auto res = oneapi::dpl::reduce(oneapi::dpl::execution::make_device_policy<class reduce_kernel>(q),
                                     stride2, stride2 + 5);

      // is_indirectly_device_accessible_v: 1
      // result: 20
      std::cout << "is_indirectly_device_accessible_v: "
                << (oneapi::dpl::is_indirectly_device_accessible_v<strided_iterator<int*>>) << std::endl;
      std::cout << "result: " << res << std::endl;

      sycl::free(d_head, q);
      return 0;
  }

The example above uses ``oneapi::dpl::is_indirectly_device_accessible<It>``, where ``It`` is ``int*``.
|onedpl_short| predefines an overload of
``oneapi::dpl::is_indirectly_device_accessible<int*>`` that returns ``std::true_type``
assuming that pointers refer to USM-allocated data.
It also automatically treats the following entities as *indirectly device accessible*:

> - Iterators to ``std::vector`` with a USM allocator.
> - ``counting_iterator`` and ``discard_iterator``.
> - ``zip_iterator``, ``transform_iterator``, and ``permutation_iterator``,
>   if their underlying iterators are *indirectly device accessible*.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Iterators to ``std::vector`` with a USM allocator.
- Objects returned by ``oneapi::dpl::begin`` and ``oneapi::dpl::end`` functions. 
- ``counting_iterator`` and ``discard_iterator``.
- ``zip_iterator``, ``transform_iterator``, and ``permutation_iterator``,
  if their underlying iterators are *indirectly device accessible*.
```

  This may lead to performance degradation, and also requires that the data be accessible on the host to be
  copied into the temporary memory buffer.

The term *indirectly device accessible* means that the data referenced by the iterator
can be accessed from within a SYCL kernel (that is, on a device).
|onedpl_short| determines this by examining the return type of the free function
``is_onedpl_indirectly_device_accessible(It)``, where ``It`` is the iterator type.
If the return type is ``std::true_type``, the iterator is considered *indirectly device accessible*.
This function is defined in ``<oneapi/dpl/iterator>`` in the ``oneapi::dpl`` namespace.

To make a custom iterator *indirectly device accessible* (assume its type is ``It``),
define an overload of ``is_onedpl_indirectly_device_accessible``
that accepts an argument of type ``It`` and returns ``std::true_type``.
This overload must be visible through argument-dependent lookup.
If it is found, the trait ``oneapi::dpl::is_onedpl_indirectly_device_accessible_v<It>``,
which is also defined in ``<oneapi/dpl/iterator>``, evaluates to ``true``.
The example below shows how to define such an overload:

.. code:: cpp

>   #include <iterator>
>   #include <cstddef>
>   #include <iostream>
> 
>   #include <oneapi/dpl/execution>
>   #include <oneapi/dpl/iterator>
>   #include <oneapi/dpl/numeric>
>   #include <oneapi/dpl/algorithm>

Reviewer: Reorder headers, add `<sycl/sycl.hpp>
```suggestion
  #include <oneapi/dpl/execution>
  #include <oneapi/dpl/iterator>
  #include <oneapi/dpl/numeric>
  #include <oneapi/dpl/algorithm>
  #include <iterator>
  #include <cstddef>
  #include <iostream>
  #include <sycl/sycl.hpp>
```

    return 0;
  }

.. _use-iterators:

Use |onedpl_short| Iterators
----------------------------

> |onedpl_short| provides a set of `iterators <iterators-details>`_ that can be used to pass data to algorithms, in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|onedpl_short| provides a set of `iterators <iterator-details>`_ that can be used to pass data to algorithms, in
```

Reviewer: It seems that 
`indirectly device accessible <indirectly-device-accessible>`_ and `this table <iterator-properties-table>`_ links also do not work properly.

Author: Thanks, I think this is now fixed with your accepted changes.

combination with the iterators described above and with the return of ``oneapi::dpl::begin()`` and
``oneapi::dpl::end()``. To pass data to an algorithm with a device execution policy with minimum data movement, use
iterators that are both `SYCL device-copyable`_ and `indirectly device accessible <indirectly-device-accessible>`_.
These properties of the |onedpl_short| iterators are described in `this table <iterator-properties-table>`_.

Use Custom Iterators
--------------------
If the provided iterators are not sufficient for your needs, you can create your own iterators that can be used as input

> to |onedpl_short| algorithms. To pass data efficiently to an algorithm with a device execution policy, the custom
> iterator must be SYCL device-copyable and indirectly device accessible. If a custom iterator is *not* defined to be
> indirectly device accessible, the algorithm will create a temporary SYCL buffer to copy the data from the iterator to
> the device. This may lead to performance degradation, and also requires that the data be accessible on the host to be
> copied into the temporary SYCL buffer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to |onedpl_short| algorithms. The custom iterator must be SYCL device-copyable.
If it references data accessible on a device, it also must be indirectly device accessible.

.. note::

  If a custom iterator is *not* defined to be indirectly device accessible, 
  the algorithm will create a temporary SYCL buffer to copy the data from the iterator to the device. 
  This may lead to performance degradation, and also requires that
  the data be accessible on the host to be copied into the temporary SYCL buffer.
```
